PROF-929: Add java profiling doc (#6626)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/profiling/_index.md

---
title: Profiling
kind: Documentation
further_reading:
    - link: 'https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/introducing-datadog-profiling/'
      tags: 'Blog'
      text: 'Introducing always-on production profiling in Datadog.'
---

<div class="alert alert-info">
Datadog Profiling is in beta. Reach out to <a href="/help/">Datadog Support</a> if you encounter any issues or have feedback to share.
</div>

## Setup

> Profiling libraries are shipped within the following tracing language library. Select your language below to learn how to enable profiling for your application:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Profiling libraries are shipped within the following tracing language libraries. Select your language below to learn how to enable profiling for your application:
```

even though it's only one.... we pretend that more will come

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Java" %}}

> The Datadog Profiler requires [Java Flight Recorder][1]. The Datadog Profiling library is supported OpenJDK 11, Oracle Java 11, and Zulu Java 8. All JVM-based languages, i.e. Scala, Groovy, Kotlin, Clojure, etc. are supported. To begin profiling applications:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Datadog Profiler requires [Java Flight Recorder][1]. The Datadog Profiling library is supported in OpenJDK 11, Oracle Java 11, and Zulu Java 8. All JVM-based languages, such as Scala, Groovy, Kotlin, Clojure, etc. are supported. To begin profiling applications:
```

> The Datadog Profiler requires [Java Flight Recorder][1]. The Datadog Profiling library is supported OpenJDK 11, Oracle Java 8 with a commercial license, Oracle Java 11, and Zulu Java 8. All JVM-based languages, i.e. Scala, Groovy, Kotlin, Clojure, etc. are supported. To begin profiling applications:

Reviewer 2: Turns out I was wrong about it working with Oracle 8 with commercial license, sorry!

> 1. Download `dd-java-agent.jar`, which contains the Java Agent class files and add the `dd-trace-java` version your `pom.xml` or equivalent:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Download `dd-java-agent.jar`, which contains the Java Agent class files, and add the `dd-trace-java` version to your `pom.xml` or equivalent:
```

    ```shell
    wget -O dd-java-agent.jar 'https://repository.sonatype.org/service/local/artifact/maven/redirect?r=central-proxy&g=com.datadoghq&a=dd-java-agent&v=LATEST'
    ```

2. Update your service invocation to look like:

    ```text

>     java -javaagent:dd-java-agent.jar -Ddd.profiling.enabled=true -Ddd.profiling.api-key.file=<API_KEY_FILE> -jar <YOUR_SERVICE>.jar <YOUR_SERVICE_FLAGS>

Reviewer 2: Tiny fix- `dd.profiling.api-key-file`

    ```

3. After a minute or two, visualize your profiles in the [Datadog APM > Profiling page][2].

**Note**:

- The `-javaagent` needs to be run before the `-jar` file, adding it as a JVM option, not as an application argument. For more information, see the [Oracle documentation][3]:

    ```shell
    # Good:
    java -javaagent:dd-java-agent.jar ... -jar my-service.jar -more-flags
    # Bad:
    java -jar my-service.jar -javaagent:dd-java-agent.jar ...
    ```

- Because profiles are sent directly to Datadog without using the Datadog Agent, you must pass a valid [Datadog API key][4].

> - Alternativelly to passing arguments, can use environment variable to set those paramters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- As an alternative to passing arguments, you can use environment variable to set those parameters:
```

| Arguments                     | Environment variable      | Description                                       |
| ----------------------------- | ------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| `-Ddd.profiling.enabled`      | DD_PROFILING_ENABLED      | Set to `true` to enable profiling.                |

> | `-Ddd.profiling.api-key.file` | DD_PROFILING_API_KEY_FILE | File that should contain the API key as a string. |

Reviewer 2: Here too- `profiling.api-key-file`

| Env      | The environment your application is running on (`prod`, `staging`).                                    |
| Service  | The name of the [service][3] your code is running.                                                     |
| Version  | The version of your code.                                                                              |
| Host     | The host name your profiled process is running on. If running in Kubernetes, it's the name of the pod. |
| Runtime  | The type of runtime the profiled process is running (`JVM`, `CPython`).                                |
| Language | The language of your code (`Java`, `Python`).                                                          |

The following measures are available:

| Measure           | Definition                                                                                                                                                                           |
| ----------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |

> | CPU cores              | CPU load summed on all cores of the process. This means this can go above `100%` and the theoretical limit is `nCores` \* `100%`.                                                    |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| CPU cores              | CPU load summed on all cores of the process. This metric can go above `100%`, and the theoretical limit is `nCores` \* `100%`.                                                    |
```

| Memory Allocation | Memory allocation rate in `Bytes/s` over the course of the profile. This value can be above the maximum amount of RAM memory because it can be garbage collected during the profile. |

## Profile

> Click on one line to view a specific profile:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click on a line to view a specific profile:
```

{{< img src="tracing/profiling/profile.png" alt="A specic profile">}}

> The profile header contains information associated with your profile, like: the service that generated it, or the environment and code version associated to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The profile header contains information associated with your profile, like the service that generated it, or the environment and code version associated to it.
```

Four tabs are below the profile header:

| Tab          | Definition                                                                                                                                  |
| ------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Profiles     | Flame graph and summary table of the profile you are looking at. You can switch between multiple profile types (`CPU`, `Memory allocation`) |
| Analysis     | A set of heuristics that suggest potential issues or areas of improvement in your code                                                      |
| Metrics      | Profiling metrics coming from all profiles of the same service                                                                              |

> | Runtime Info | Text dump of all the Runtime properties                                                                                                     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Runtime Info | Text dump of all the runtime properties                                                                                                     |
```

---
title: Profiling
kind: Documentation
further_reading:
    - link: 'https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/introducing-datadog-profiling/'
      tags: 'Blog'
      text: 'Introducing always-on production profiling in Datadog.'
---

<div class="alert alert-info">
Datadog Profiling is in beta. Reach out to <a href="/help/">Datadog Support</a> if you encounter any issues or have feedback to share.
</div>

> Profiling libraries are shipped within the following tracing language library. Refer to the dedicated language page to learn how to enable profile connections for your application:

Reviewer 2: "profile connections" -> "profiling"

---
title: Profiling
kind: Documentation
further_reading:
    - link: 'https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/introducing-datadog-profiling/'
      tags: 'Blog'
      text: 'Introducing always-on production profiling in Datadog.'
---

<div class="alert alert-info">
Datadog Profiling is in beta. Reach out to <a href="/help/">Datadog Support</a> if you encounter any issues or have feedback to share.
</div>

> Profiling libraries are shipped within the following tracing language library. Refer to the dedicated language page to learn how to enable profile connections for your application:

Reviewer 2: It sounds like node will ship the profiler in its own repo for now.

Reviewer 3: Let's address this in another PR as for now only Java is available.

Reviewer 2: Fwiw, go and python are expected to be in the next releases of their respective libs.

{{< partial name="profiling/profiling-languages.html" >}}

> ## Profile explorer

Reviewer 2: Are we actually calling this "explorer"? @nick-adams you had mentioned we were trying to phase that out at some point. Is that still true?

Reviewer 3: happy to get the new wording implemented :)

Reviewer 4: Ill check on this, it's just something I've heard but need to confirm. TBD

Reviewer 4: Little e "explorer" seems to be fine when referring to stuff like this where you're searching and filtering. "Go to the Profile explorer."

But it sounds like we just want to avoid putting that explicitly as the nav item and in the title on the page, so `Profiles` not `Profile Explorer`.

Once your profile collection is set up, profiles are available in the [APM > Profiling][1] page within Datadog:

{{< img src="tracing/profiling/profiling_main_page.png" alt="Profiling main page">}}

> Each row is a profile of a process for a short amount of time. Depending on the language, these processes are profiled between 15s and 60s.

Reviewer 2: Updated suggestion-
> Each row is a profile of a process for a short amount of time. By default profiles are uploaded once a minute.

The fact that they're uploaded once a minute may be more important than the duration of the profiles in understanding the search page. And the duration is actually more complicated than this and is shown in each profile.

> Each line represents a profile for a process on which Datadog profiling was running for a short amount of time. Depending on the language, these processes are profiled between 15s and 60s.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each row is a profile of a process for a short amount of time. Depending on the language, these processes are profiled between 15s and 60s.
```

### Search

You can filter according to infrastructure tags or application tags set up from your [environment tracing configuration][2]. By default the following facets are available:

|  Facet   |  Definition                                                             |
| -------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Env      | The environment your application is running on (`prod`, `staging`).     |
| Service  | The name of the [service][3] your code is running.                      |
| Version  | The version of your code.                                               |
| Host     | The host name your profiled process is running on.                      |
| Runtime  | The type of runtime the profiled process is running (`JVM`, `CPython`). |

> | Language | The language of your code (`Java`, `Python`).                           |

Reviewer 2: Language and runtime still need some love. IMO we should leave them out of the docs until then. 

Maybe even then; if this is a getting-started-type doc (rather than reference material), we don't want to overwhelm new users with details. They'll see what facets we have by default. Maybe that even argues for deleting this section altogether.

Before we do that though, let's talk through the high level structure. What types of docs do we have/want? Quick start? Into tutorial? How tos? Reference material? For one example, see how gcp differentiates these- 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/16651846/75443092-b51a7880-592e-11ea-801a-f085c08ea919.png)

Reviewer 3: Let's keep it for now as it allows a better discoverability of the profiling product if a user is not a Datadog customer.

For now the whole content can fit in one page, hence the current layout, as soon as we have material for guides, Getting started or more reference material we will update the layout of this section accordingly.

Reviewer 2: I'm all about discoverability! I'm not sure I follow though, how does it hurt discoverability if we have a quickstart for power users that are already familiar with profilers (in general, not ours), and also a longer tutorial for less experienced users?

Reviewer 2: Either way, this is still relevant:

Language and runtime still need some love; for the moment they're not always set, nor always have exactly what they say they have. In fact `host` is similar: on vms it's actually the host. In k8s (for now) it's actually the name of the pod. IMO while they're ~wrong, we should leave them out of the docs.

Again, leaving something (obvious) out of the docs seems worse to me than including something more or less incorrect in the docs.

Reviewer 3: Nothing is obvious, otherwise there would be no need for a documentation in a first place.  I updated the host description, let's address other confusion in further PR.

The following measures are available:

|  Measure          | Definition                                                                                                                                                                          |
| ----------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | CPU               | CPU load summed on all cores of the process. This means this can go above `100%` and the theoretical limit is `nCores` \* `100%`.                                                    |

Reviewer 2: Changing to cores. Resolve above first though.

Reviewer 2: Take a look at the product for the latest.

| Memory Allocation | Memory allocation rate in `Bytes/s` over the course of the profile. This value can be above the maximum amount of RAM memory because it can be garbage collected during the profile. |

## Profile

Click on one line to view a specific profile:

{{< img src="tracing/profiling/profile.png" alt="A specic profile">}}

The profile header contains information associated with your profile, like: the service that generated it, or the environment and code version associated to it. In the upper right corner of each profile, there are options to:

- Download the profile

> - Switch the profile to full screen

Reviewer 2: These should go at the end if at all; they're the ~least important thing on the panel.

Reviewer 3: Those are feature proposed by the profile modal and are available for all languages so they have to be documented.

Reviewer 2: Ok, then they should be at the end.

Below the profile header you can find 4 tabs:

| Tab          |  Definition                                                                                                                                 |
| ------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Profiles     | Flame graph and summary table of the profile you are looking at. You can switch between multiple profile types (`CPU`, `Memory allocation`) |
| Analysis     | A set of heuristics that suggest potential issues or areas of improvement in your code                                                      |
| Metrics      | Profiling metrics coming from all profiles of the same service                                                                              |
| Runtime Info | Text dump of all the Runtime properties                                                                                                     |

### Profile types

> In the **Profiles** tab you can see all profile types available for a given language. Depending of the language, the information collected about your profile differs. Refer to the dedicated profile types section for your language to see which one are collected:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the **Profiles** tab you can see all profile types available for a given language. Depending on the language, the information collected about your profile differs. Refer to the dedicated profile types section for your language to see what is collected:
```

{{< partial name="profiling/profiling-languages.html" >}}

## Troubleshooting

> Datadog profiling is in beta. It doesn't work with some configurations or environments:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Datadog profiling is in beta. Note the following limitations:
```

> - Datadog profiling does not work with serverless.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Datadog profiling does not yet work with serverless.
```

Reviewer 3: We avoid wording like "currently, yet" in the doc. The doc is timeless.

> - Datadog profiling does not work with complex proxy configuration. Profiles are sent directly from your application to Datadog.

Reviewer 2: We have proxy support at least for java and maybe elsewhere.

Reviewer 3: Let's address this in another PR, creating a card for tracking

Reviewer 2: Let's at least delete it here then and follow up separately; it's better to have no info than wrong info :-)

Reviewer 3: Deleted

> In case you have done all the necessary configuration steps and do not see profiles in the [profile search page](#search-profiles), please turn on [debug mode][4] and open a support ticket with debug files and following information:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case you have done all the necessary configuration steps and do not see profiles in the [profile search page](#search-profiles), turn on [debug mode][4] and open a support ticket with debug files and the following information:
```
